Add idle detection article (#2630)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/idle-detection/index.md

---
title: Detect inactive users with the Idle Detection API
subhead: Use the Idle Detection API to find out when the user isn't actively using their device.
authors:
  - thomassteiner
description: |
  The Idle Detection API notifies developers when a user is idle, indicating such things as lack of
  interaction with the keyboard, mouse, screen, activation of a screensaver, locking of the screen,
  or moving to a different screen. A developer-defined threshold triggers the notification.

> date: 2020-04-20

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2020-04-30
```

- Publicly exposed kiosk apps, for example in museums, can use this API to return to the "home"
view if no one interacts with the kiosk anymore.
- Apps that require expensive calculations, for example to draw charts,
can limit these calculations to moments when the user interacts with their device.

## Current status {: #status }

<div class="w-table-wrapper">

| Step                                     | Status                   |
| ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| 1. Create explainer                      | [Complete][explainer]    |
| 2. Create initial draft of specification | Not started              |
| 3. Gather feedback & iterate on design   | [In progress](#feedback) |
| 4. Origin trial                          | Not started              |
| 5. Launch                                | Not started              |

</div>

## How to use the Idle Detection API {: #use }

### Enabling via chrome://flags

To experiment with the Idle Detection API locally, without an origin trial token, enable the
`#enable-experimental-web-platform-features` flag in `chrome://flags`.

### Enabling support during the origin trial phase

> Starting in Chrome TODO, the Idle Detection API will be available as an origin trial in Chrome.

Author: ```suggestion
Starting in Chrome 84, the Idle Detection API will be available as an origin trial until Chrome 87.
```

> The origin trial is expected to end in Chrome TODO.

Author: ```suggestion
The origin trial is expected to end in Chrome 87.
```

The minimum `threshold` is 60 seconds. You start the idle detection by calling the
`IdleDetector`'s `start()` method, and you can stop it again by calling the `stop()` method.

There are two ways to get updates on the user's idle state: the first is for one-off requests by
checking the `IdleDetector`'s `state` property. The sample below polls the `state`,
which after one minute of inactivity will be reported as the `user` being `"idle"`.

```js
try {
  const idleDetector = new IdleDetector({ threshold: 60 });
  await idleDetector.start();
  console.log("Initial idle state:", idleDetector.state);
  // Every 10 seconds poll the user's idle state
  const interval = setInterval(() => {
    console.log("Current idle state:", idleDetector.state);
  }, 10 * 1000);
  // After 2min, stop the idle detection
  setTimeout(async () => {
    clearInterval(interval);
    await idleDetector.stop();
  }, 120 * 1000);
} catch (err) {
  // Deal with initialization errors like
  // permission denied, running outside of top-level frame, etc.
  console.error(err.name, err.message);
}
```

The second, _and preferred_, way is by subscribing to `change` events via an event listener.

> To extract the two properties of interest of the fired event, namely `user` and `screen`,
> you can use the new object destructuring syntax in JavaScript.

Author: ```suggestion
```

---
title: Detecting when the user is idle
subhead: Use the Idle Detection API to find out when the user isn't actively using their device.
authors:
  - thomassteiner
description: |
  The Idle Detection API notifies developers when a user is idle, indicating such things as lack of
  interaction with the keyboard, mouse, screen, activation of a screensaver, locking of the screen,
  or moving to a different screen. A developer-defined threshold triggers the notification.
date: 2020-04-20
tags:
  - post
  - idle-detection
  - fugu
  - capabilities
hero: hero.jpg #https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1544239265-ee5eedde5469?ixlib=rb-1.2.1&ixid=eyJhcHBfaWQiOjEyMDd9&auto=format&fit=crop&w=1900&q=80
alt: Abandoned computer on a bed with someone's leg next to it.

> draft: true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Just leaving a reminder to remove this before merging

origin_trial:

>   url: TODO

Reviewer: TODO

Author: The final ToDo closes with the link being https://developers.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/551690954352885761.

- Publicly exposed kiosk apps, for example in museums, can use this API to return to the "home"
view if no one interacts with the kiosk anymore.
- Apps that require expensive calculations, for example to draw charts,
can limit these calculations to moments when the user interacts with their device.

## Current status {: #status }

<div class="w-table-wrapper">

| Step                                     | Status                   |
| ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| 1. Create explainer                      | [Complete][explainer]    |
| 2. Create initial draft of specification | Not started              |
| 3. Gather feedback & iterate on design   | [In progress](#feedback) |
| 4. Origin trial                          | Not started              |
| 5. Launch                                | Not started              |

</div>

## How to use the Idle Detection API {: #use }

### Enabling via chrome://flags

To experiment with the Idle Detection API locally, without an origin trial token, enable the
`#enable-experimental-web-platform-features` flag in `chrome://flags`.

### Enabling support during the origin trial phase

> Starting in Chrome TODO, the Idle Detection API will be available as an origin trial in Chrome.

Reviewer: TODO

Author: 84

> The origin trial is expected to end in Chrome TODO.

Reviewer: TODO

Author: 87

{% include 'content/origin-trials.njk' %}

### Register for the origin trial {: #register-for-ot }

{% include 'content/origin-trial-register.njk' %}

### Feature detection

To check if the Idle Detection API is supported, use:

```javascript
if ('IdleDetector' in window) {
  // Idle Detector API supported
}
```

### Idle Detection API concepts

The Idle Detection API assumes that there is some level of engagement between the user,
the user agent (that is, the browser), and the operating system of the device in use.
This is represented in two dimensions:

- **The user idle state:**

>   `active` or `idle`: the user has, respectively has not,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `active` or `idle`: the user has or has not
```
I stumbled over this sentence

`IdleDetector`'s `start()` method, and you can stop it again by calling the `stop()` method.

There are two ways to get updates on the user's idle state: the first is for one-off requests by
checking the `IdleDetector`'s `state` property. The sample below polls the `state`,
which after one minute of inactivity will be reported as the `user` being `"idle"`.

```js
try {
  const idleDetector = new IdleDetector({ threshold: 60 });
  await idleDetector.start();
  console.log("Initial idle state:", idleDetector.state);
  // Every 10 seconds poll the user's idle state
  const interval = setInterval(() => {
    console.log("Current idle state:", idleDetector.state);
  }, 10 * 1000);
  // After 2min, stop the idle detection
  setTimeout(async () => {
    clearInterval(interval);
    await idleDetector.stop();
  }, 120 * 1000);
} catch (err) {
  // Deal with initialization errors like
  // permission denied, running outside of top-level frame, etc.
  console.error(err.name, err.message);
}
```

The second, _and preferred_, way is by subscribing to `change` events via an event listener.
To extract the two properties of interest of the fired event, namely `user` and `screen`,

> you can use the new object destructuring syntax in JavaScript.

Reviewer: I'm not seeing any object destructuring syntax in the code sample?

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Destructuring_assignment#Object_destructuring

Author: Good catch. This was simplified, since it added confusion. The sentence remained, though.

}
```

### Demo

You can see the Idle Detection API in action with the [Ephemeral Canvas demo][demo] that erases its
contents after 60 seconds of inactivity. You could imagine this being deployed in a department
store for kids to doodle on.

![Ephemeral Canvas demo](demo.png)

## Security and permissions {: #security-and-permissions }

The Chrome team has designed and implemented the Idle Detection API using the core principles
defined in [Controlling Access to Powerful Web Platform Features][powerful-apis],
including user control, transparency, and ergonomics.

### User control and privacy

A new [permission](https://w3c.github.io/permissions/), tentatively named `"idle-detection"`
will be associated with this functionality. The permission might be auto-granted by user agents
based on heuristics, such as user engagement, the install state of the web app,
or having granted similar permissions such as [Wake Lock](/wakelock/). In Chrome,
we plan to auto-grant it.

We always want to prevent malicious actors from misusing new APIs. Seemingly independent websites,
but that in fact are controlled by the same entity, might obtain user idle information and

> correlate the data to identify unique users across origins. To mitigate this sort of attacks,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
correlate the data to identify unique users across origins. To mitigate these sort of attacks,
```

the user agent (that is, the browser), and the operating system of the device in use.
This is represented in two dimensions:

- **The user idle state:**
  `active` or `idle`: the user has or has not
interacted with the user agent for some period of time.
- **The screen idle state:**
  `locked` or `unlocked`: the system has an active screen lock (like a screensaver) preventing
  interaction with the user agent.

Distinguishing `active` from `idle` requires heuristics that may differ across user, user agent,
and operating system. It should also be a reasonably coarse threshold
(see [Security and Permissions](#security-and-permissions)).

The model intentionally does not formally distinguish between interaction with particular content
(that is, the webpage in a tab using the API), the user agent as a whole, or the operating system;
this definition is left to the user agent.

### Using the Idle Detection API

The first step when using the Idle Detection API is
to ensure the `'notifications'` permission is granted.
The second step is then to instantiate the `IdleDetector`.
The minimum `threshold` is 60,000 milliseconds (1 minute).
You can finally start the idle detection by calling the

> `IdleDetector`'s `start()` method.

Author: ```suggestion
`IdleDetector`'s `start()` method.
It takes an object with the desired idle `threshold` in milliseconds
and `signal` with an [`AbortSignal`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/AbortSignal)
to abort idle detection as parameters.
```

  // Idle Detector API supported
}
```

### Idle Detection API concepts

The Idle Detection API assumes that there is some level of engagement between the user,
the user agent (that is, the browser), and the operating system of the device in use.
This is represented in two dimensions:

- **The user idle state:**
  `active` or `idle`: the user has or has not
interacted with the user agent for some period of time.
- **The screen idle state:**
  `locked` or `unlocked`: the system has an active screen lock (like a screensaver) preventing
  interaction with the user agent.

Distinguishing `active` from `idle` requires heuristics that may differ across user, user agent,
and operating system. It should also be a reasonably coarse threshold
(see [Security and Permissions](#security-and-permissions)).

The model intentionally does not formally distinguish between interaction with particular content
(that is, the webpage in a tab using the API), the user agent as a whole, or the operating system;
this definition is left to the user agent.

### Using the Idle Detection API

The first step when using the Idle Detection API is
to ensure the `'notifications'` permission is granted.

> The second step is then to initialize the `IdleDetector`.
> It takes an object with the desired idle `threshold` in milliseconds
> and `signal` with an [`AbortSignal`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/AbortSignal)
> to abort idle detection as parameters.

Author: ```suggestion
The second step is then to instantiate the `IdleDetector`.
```

  // Idle Detector API supported
}
```

### Idle Detection API concepts

The Idle Detection API assumes that there is some level of engagement between the user,
the user agent (that is, the browser), and the operating system of the device in use.
This is represented in two dimensions:

- **The user idle state:**
  `active` or `idle`: the user has or has not
interacted with the user agent for some period of time.
- **The screen idle state:**
  `locked` or `unlocked`: the system has an active screen lock (like a screensaver) preventing
  interaction with the user agent.

Distinguishing `active` from `idle` requires heuristics that may differ across user, user agent,
and operating system. It should also be a reasonably coarse threshold
(see [Security and Permissions](#security-and-permissions)).

The model intentionally does not formally distinguish between interaction with particular content
(that is, the webpage in a tab using the API), the user agent as a whole, or the operating system;
this definition is left to the user agent.

### Using the Idle Detection API

The first step when using the Idle Detection API is
to ensure the `'notifications'` permission is granted.

> The second step is then to initialize the `IdleDetector`.

Reviewer 2: Initialization now happens on `start()` (the third step).

Author: Fixed.

It takes an object with the desired idle `threshold` in milliseconds
and `signal` with an [`AbortSignal`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/AbortSignal)
to abort idle detection as parameters.

> The minimum `threshold` is 60.000 milliseconds (1 minute).

Reviewer 2: Use a comma as the thousands separator.

> The minimum `threshold` is 60.000 milliseconds (1 minute).

Author: ```suggestion
The minimum `threshold` is 60,000 milliseconds (1 minute).
```

Yuck. Localization is hard…

- **The screen idle state:**
  `locked` or `unlocked`: the system has an active screen lock (like a screensaver) preventing
  interaction with the user agent.

Distinguishing `active` from `idle` requires heuristics that may differ across user, user agent,
and operating system. It should also be a reasonably coarse threshold
(see [Security and Permissions](#security-and-permissions)).

The model intentionally does not formally distinguish between interaction with particular content
(that is, the webpage in a tab using the API), the user agent as a whole, or the operating system;
this definition is left to the user agent.

### Using the Idle Detection API

The first step when using the Idle Detection API is
to ensure the `'notifications'` permission is granted.
The second step is then to instantiate the `IdleDetector`.
The minimum `threshold` is 60,000 milliseconds (1 minute).
You can finally start the idle detection by calling the
`IdleDetector`'s `start()` method.
It takes an object with the desired idle `threshold` in milliseconds
and `signal` with an [`AbortSignal`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/AbortSignal)
to abort idle detection as parameters.

> ```js

Reviewer 3: I think this code block is too big for a developer to consume in a single section. I'd suggest breaking it into three separate sections:

1) Start the Idle Detector (feature detection, permission check)
2) Listen for changes (add event listener and event handler)
3) Stop the idle detector

I'd also put the whole abort controller into section 3, it's a relatively new concept, so it should be covered there, with a few additional comments.

Reviewer 4: +1

If there's any wisdom to be shared this makes it possible to put it in the body font (meaning outside the code samples), which is easier to read.

Author: I've split the code block in three parts and link to an article how to request the notification permission.

const main = async () => {
  // Feature detection.
  if (!('IdleDetector' in window)) {
    return console.log('IdleDetector is not available.');
  }
  // Check if notifications permission is granted.

>   if ((await navigator.permissions.query({name: 'notifications'})).state !== 'granted') {

Reviewer 3: This exceeds 80 chars, and causes scroll, can we break it down?

```suggestion
  const hasPermission = await navigator.permissions.query({name: 'notifications'});
  if (hasPermission.state !== 'granted') {
```

Author: Not a fan of throwaway variables, but in this case it's better, yes.

    return console.log('Notifications permission not granted.');
  }
  try {
    const controller = new AbortController();
    const signal = controller.signal;

    const idleDetector = new IdleDetector();
    idleDetector.addEventListener('change', () => {

>       console.log(`Idle change: ${idleDetector.userState}, ${idleDetector.screenState}.`);

Reviewer 3: Exceeds 80 chars, can we break it down

```suggestion
      const userState = idleDetector.userState;
      const screenState = idleDetector.screenState;
      console.log(`Idle change: ${userState}, ${screenState}.`);
```

(see [Security and Permissions](#security-and-permissions)).

The model intentionally does not formally distinguish between interaction with particular content
(that is, the webpage in a tab using the API), the user agent as a whole, or the operating system;
this definition is left to the user agent.

### Using the Idle Detection API

The first step when using the Idle Detection API is
to ensure the `'notifications'` permission is granted.
The second step is then to instantiate the `IdleDetector`.
The minimum `threshold` is 60,000 milliseconds (1 minute).
You can finally start the idle detection by calling the
`IdleDetector`'s `start()` method.
It takes an object with the desired idle `threshold` in milliseconds
and `signal` with an [`AbortSignal`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/AbortSignal)
to abort idle detection as parameters.

```js
const main = async () => {
  // Feature detection.
  if (!('IdleDetector' in window)) {
    return console.log('IdleDetector is not available.');
  }
  // Check if notifications permission is granted.
  const hasPermission = await navigator.permissions.query({name: 'notifications'});
  if (hasPermission.state !== 'granted') {

>     return console.log('Notifications permission not granted.');

Reviewer 2: Should we include an example of requesting notification permission with [`Notification.requestPermission()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Notification/requestPermission)?

Reviewer 4: Is there something unique about it to this subject? If not, it's better to link to an established article. Otherwise, you'd need to update this article if something changes, assuming somebody remembers it exists.

Author: I now link to an article that describes this.

}
```

### Polyfilling

Some aspects of the Idle Detection API are polyfillable
and idle detection libraries like [idle.ts](https://github.com/dropbox/idle.ts) exist,
but these approaches are constrained to a web app's own content area:
The library running in the context of the web app

> needs to costly poll for input events or listen to visibility changes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
needs to expensively poll for input events or listen to visibility changes.
```

Reviewer 4: The adverb form of 'cost' here would be 'costily', but that is not a word in English.

Author: I pulled this from the Explainer, but thanks for the note. Expensively works perfectly fine.
